(quiet, pensive music gradually increasing in volume)
(atonal piano music)
(pulsing)
Everything had been fine,
sailing along smoothly in my career
writing music for TV and film.
And I really thought I had a handle on music.
Then, bam, something happened.
(chaotic music)
And I suddenly saw life through a different filter.
New sounds, new colors, new shades of feeling.
I'd entered a parallel dimension of sorts,
one much larger than the one we're in now,
a universe that includes this one,
yet goes beyond it.
Here's how it all happened.
I was walking along the path
and I poked my head around the bend a little bit
trying to see what might lie ahead in the future of music.
When I came upon a man by the side of the trail.
I found out later he was a sonic sorcerer,
but I didn't know that at the time.
He called himself Ervin McDonald Wilson,
and I said, "Hey, I think I've heard about you."
He said, "Come here, I wanna show you something."
And what he showed me, over the next 20 years,
blasted open a port to a vast universe
that very few even know exists.
Some of what you might hear there
can sound something like this.
(atonal music)
In fact, much of the music you will be hearing
in the background from here on out,
will be nuggets of sonic gold,
extracted from different planets within this sonic,
will sonic, universe.
I came to find out that amongst the handful of people
who had also caught a glimpse
of this infinitely creative realm he'd opened up,
nobody knew how to explain it in plain English.
They could explain the individual fruits of his labor,
but all had great difficulty explaining
the tree they came from,
or the orchard, or the region, or the state.
Any kind of simple overview explaining what he does,
how it's different and why anyone should care.
So about five years ago I got together
with a couple of other guys who write music,
Gary David, a jazz musician
with a doctorate in philosophy,
who studied with Erv back in the 1960s,
and Marcus Hobbs, a techno composer,
computer programmer, who studied with him
in the late 90s.
Turns out, it took us this long, five years,
to come up with a simple way to break it all down for you.
And we went down a rabbit hole.
Looking at his work through the lens of philosophy,
art, acoustics, psychology, emotion, mathematics.
I traveled across the country
interviewing an astro-biologist,
a healer that uses unusual musical frequencies,
instrument makers, composers, dancers,
musicians with perfect pitch, a heavy metal guitarist,
all these people profoundly influenced by Erv Wilson.
So in this intro, we're going to do just this,
one, explain who Erv Wilson is
and exactly what he does,
two, how his work is a ground breaking,
game changing musical innovation,
and three, why this stuff is just so damn cool.
(upbeat techno music)
Okay, so what does Erv Wilson do?
In a nutshell, he sculpts with numbers.
But that's only the beginning.
He devises ingenious, almost magical ways
to create extended families of new musical frequencies.
He then often takes these new notes
and maps them onto three dimensional objects like this
so we can see all the ways
the notes are connected to each other.
Another words, he works with numbers
to uncover musical notes
you can't find on a regular instrument like the piano.
Because the new notes would literally
fall between the cracks.
And you'd have to build a new kind of piano
with lots of extra keys to be able to hear them.
Kinda like the one here he designed with 810 keys.
Actually, in order to explain the scope and level
on which he operates, we found it helpful
to construct this physical model
to use as a rough analogy of music.
Not to interpreted too literally, but take a look at it
and tell me what you think.
(bright techno music)
Think of music as a three story building.
Ground floor, 2nd floor, 3rd floor
and a skylight to the heavens.
Now these floors only represent
where our attention is at any given moment.
They are arenas of attention.
No one floor is any better than another,
because in music they all have to work together
at the same time as layers of awareness.
More like a cake than a hierarchy.
Except for the 3rd floor, and we'll get to that.
But suffice it to say, if we spend too much time
on any one floor, to the neglect of the others,
the experience becomes barren,
with music that's either too abstract
or not interesting enough.
It gets stuck.
Okay, so let's walk into the building
and see what's going on in there.
The first floor has this massive room
where all of music is consumed.
This ground level is the place of pure feeling.
what goes on inside your body and soul
when you hear or perform a piece of music,
This is the place where music is played and listened to.
That's it.
Concerts happen here, iPods operate here,
dancing happens here.
Music is simply taken in.
It's not intellectual, technical or symbolic.
It's just a party.
The bulk of our attention here is on the sensation of music,
as it flows by.
If this were a restaurant,
you could say the food is served and eaten here.
It's where the feast happens.
This is the level of musical reality.
That is, happening where it counts, in real time.
Bound to the earth.
Most music fans have a great time just hanging out here.
In fact, why ever leave?
Well, if you want to know something
about how the music you consume here is made,
then you need to scoot up the ladder to the 2nd floor.
(ascending musical arpeggio)
The 2nd floor is only for
those who thirst for more than the first.
This is where recipes are created.
Composers live here, music theory people,
technical people, instrument makers,
anyone who works in patterns
or relationships of notes or rhythms.
This is the level where musical rules
are devised and followed,
where those who create music
decide what goes well with what.
What chords fit together, what notes can be combined
into a tasty melody to be served up on the first floor.
They're like chefs conjuring up recipes.
In fact, the act of composition usually consists
of jumping back and forth
between the 2nd floor of pattern making
and the 1st floor of sensation.
They have to work together
for the music to be emotional and interesting,
kind of like a left brain, right brain thing.
But not exactly.
The excitement felt here on the 2nd floor
comes mainly from placing the attention
on cool patterns and note relationships.
For more musicians, composers and listeners,
these two floors provide a lifetime of fun.
This much in and of itself may seem fairly complete.
Except, what's on the 3rd floor?
Well, if we walk up the ladder, we'll see at first
not much appears to be going on up there.
In fact, it's fairly empty and quiet.
The 3rd floor is a mystery.
That very few bother to see.
This is the realm
where the master set of ingredients
sits on its throne in what we call the tuning system,
or master scale.
In the case of American and European music,
we're talking about the 12 notes on the piano,
from C natural to the C above it.
And then they start all over again from C to C.
In the West, all songs, symphonies, chords, melodies,
in fact any pattern derived on our 2nd floor,
is made from these 12 notes
as they beam down and permeate everything,
regardless of musical style,
whether rock, classical, jazz, whatever.
Those 12 notes in the master set
are the only ones allowed to pass below
where they get recycled, recombined
and reordered on the 2nd floor to form new songs
that are served up for consumption on the first.
But very few songwriters, musicians or composers
ever question where these 12 notes came from
and why they deserve the privileged status
of being the only frequencies allowed to pass their DNA
down to the 2nd and 1st floors.
When actually, truth be told,
there are in infinite number of alternate frequencies
and frequency relationships with which
brand new music can be written.
Composers that work with this wider choice of notes
are called microtonalists.
And they spend a lotta time up here.
It's a different kinda kitchen.
The attention here is focused on the system itself
and the context in which everything below happens.
Assumptions get examined here.
On this floor the imagination goes wild
in a jungle of numbers which then become
highly structured and converted into a tuning system.
Excitement here is generated
by creating new tonal ingredients
that get kicked down to the chefs on the 2nd floor,
who can then cook up cool note patterns
that will evoke new shades of feeling
when performed on the 1st floor.
(percussive piano playing)
Okay, but what about the skylight above the 3rd floor?
The sky is vast and full of stars.
If you gaze through the skylight
for even a short length of time,
you'll go blind.
There are too many stars for the eyes to take in.
Their collective light is just too bright.
Hence we need Venetian blinds on our skylight
to let in only the light of a select few stars.
Our brains would explode without such a filtering process
that enables us to take small, manageable bites of light.
So now think of each of those zillion stars
as having its own distinct musical note.
If they came at us all at once, we'd be hit
with an incoherent blast of noise.
So what has evolved over time
is that each culture or subculture
has gradually settled on a particular number of blinds
and also on the distance between each blind.
In the West we have 12 equally spaced blinds.
In India they have 22 unequally spaced blinds.
In Indonesia they cut infinity into seven unequal pieces,
with each village determining their own spacing.
Any master set will permeate the DNA of all music below,
regardless of style.
Watch this.
I'm gonna play one single musical gesture,
a pattern of notes that cascade down from high to low.
The only difference each time I play it
will be the swapping out of the master scale.
Notice what that does to the genetic character of the music.
(fast paced repeating music in different musical keys)
What you're seeing operate here is a filtering process.
Because once we deny the existence
of everything but those few rays of light
that get filtered through the blinds,
we tend to forget all about the other stars in the sky.
They disappear from our awareness.
That filter becomes mistaken for reality itself
as the rays of light eventually burnish themselves
into the floor at level three.
Then the culture comes to treat them
as if they were always there,
in the fabric of reality itself.
But actually, it's just a product
of our own filtering system.
We create the Venetian blinds within us.
And hence, are not separate from them.
In fact, let me revise the previous point.
By saying now, that it is not so much our filters
that create the illusion,
but that the filtering process itself is a creative act,
inseparable from perception.
Hence we can embrace it for what it is,
a creative activity to have some fun with.
And this is where Erv Wilson comes in.
Not only is he a microtonalist,
but he is one that has found a way to poke his head
through the skylight.
And when he did that, he saw galaxies.
Galaxies of new musical pitch fields,
held together in coherent relationships
by the gravity of simple arithmetic.
(atonal music)
He was thus able to map large swaths of the sky,
charting new constellations of notes
that nobody knew about before.
He noted the unique properties
of many of these star clusters and by doing so,
laid the foundation by which our previous understanding
can be placed into a larger matrix of pitch organization.
To get an idea of how vast this tuning universe is,
take a look at this computerized visualization
Marcus Hobbs did of one of Wilson's galaxy clusters
he calls Moments of Symmetry.
You're looking at an infinite pitch field
in which our 12 tone master scale is a mere speck.
Kind of like how our beloved Earth is a mere dot
within the larger cosmos.
You see, there is our system, right here.
That ring with 12 equally spaced cells dividing the circle.
(major scale played on piano)
But change one little number,
way to the right of the decimal point
in the formula that generates the radii,
and the whole cosmos changes right before your eyes.
And a new galaxy comes into being with nested master sets,
each rendering a whole new set of tonal properties.
I'll demonstrate this
by repeating the same four notes on the keyboard
as the computer retunes those notes on the fly
as we morph from galaxy to galaxy.
(atonal music)
There are so many of these sonic galaxies
in this cluster that you can't count them.
That's how big and fertile this area of exploration is.
So now we can finally answer the question,
who is Erv Wilson and why should we care?
He is a cartographer, like Mercator,
a cosmologist like Stephen Hawking,
an epistimologist of pitch, like Pythagoras,
and an explorer like Magellan,
unveiling brand new horizons.
His work represents both discovery and invention.
His work is also relevant to our understanding
or perception and how belief systems in general
function similarly to our tuning systems.
Much like Copernicus,
who expanded our concept of the solar system,
by altering our understanding of how it actually operates,
Erv Wilson has expanded our concept
of what can be done on the 3rd floor and above.
The master set doesn't have to be
a fixed or static noun, sitting on a throne,
but a verb, that moves about freely within our awareness.
With Wilson's imaginative use of number logic,
a composer can now embrace the sonic sky
in its totality and hence change the function
of the Venetian blinds from static to dynamic,
where the blinds can change position
as they logically morph from star to star
along a continuum of Wilson's charted constellations.
His work invites us to create and use
master scales of notes, not as fixed values,
but more like a moving, pulsating,
electrical field of variables.
By fulling accepting our ability
to participate in the creation of the master set,
by understanding that each tuning system
is merely a small planet within a large galaxy
of related bodies,
by changing it freely within a composition as we allow in
the changing light of different stars,
then the creative act is expanded
to fully include the 3rd floor as well.
To free this realm from rigidity
amplifies the gene pool of music itself,
fully integrates our layers of awareness,
and enables the party to spread from the 1st floor
all the way up to the sky.
(ethereal tones)
(upbeat techno music)
Israelian child in an adobe house
where I lived, they had rafters
and there were little cracks in the rafters
and the wind would come singing
through the cracks in the rafters
and I could hear the wind singing
these beautiful, haunting melodies.
That were going up and down,
or they were just weave in and out
according to the strength and direction
of the wind through the rafters.
And that haunted me for the rest of my days.
It still does.
A lot of interesting musicians
got started listening to the wind.